It's 1924.
You're taking your family
on a weekendtrip to the big city.
For every generation beforeyou
this would have been a difficult trainjourney
or a multi-day journey by horse.
Butnot for you
because you just bought a car.
Suddenly, you could travel anywhere at anytime.
It was the ultimate freedom,
andcar ownership took off around the world.
But all of this was only possible
becausecars had just become affordable.
Well,one car did.
The Ford Model T.
When it launched in1908
it cost just $850, around $30,000 in today'smoney.
But just a few years later, that price wascut in half
and by 1924, it had fallen all the way to just $260.
But the Ford Model T was byno means a special car.
The real breakthroughwas the factory it was made in.
This place wasan efficiency machine.
Raw materials came intothe factory
and finished cars left.
Instead ofcars being
carefully handcrafted on a workbench,
a constant flow of chassis
moved through thefactory 24/7
and parts were added continuously.
This genius idea took the
total assembly timefrom 12 hours
down to just 90 minutes
with anew car leaving the factory every 40 seconds.
We modeled the entire thing in great detail
to show you the genius
design of the Ford Model Tfactory
and the incredible engineering
that wentinto mastering mass production.
To understand justhow
monumental Ford's impact was
we need to lookat car factories before the Model T.
Normally carswould be assembled
on a stand by a team of skilled craftsmen.
Almost nothing was automated
and alot of time was spent simply walking around thefactory and bringing parts to the car.
Any delayin a single task
meant that the other
workers hadto wait to do their task.
The whole process wasslow and expensive,
and a typical car company like Cadillac
could only make around 2,000 carseach year.
To make cars affordable for the masses
they'd have to be produced in enormous quantities.
And no one understood this
more than the FordMotor Company.
Henry Ford himself often getscredit
for turning his factory into an assemblyline
But in reality, the idea came from
one ofFord's production engineers, William Clan.
At thestart of 1913
he visited a meat packing factoryin Chicago
which was known to be one of
the mostefficient factories in the country.
When he wasthere, he was amazed by what he saw.
The animalswere hung from a rail on a ceiling
and moved tovarious stations around the factory
where theywere cut up,
processed,
and packaged, ready to beshipped out.
The whole process was
simplified downto the most basic tasks
and spread across multipleworkers.
This gave William an idea.
Althoughthis process
worked for taking apart an animal,
perhaps it could work for putting together a car.
He took the idea to Ford
and they immediatelybegan
testing it out on a relatively simple part,
the flywheel magneto.
Normally, a team of 30workers would each
assemble entire magnetos atindividual workbenches.
With this setup, around
800 magnetos could be made per day.
Ford gotrid of the workbenches
and installed a single longsteel table.
The workers were arranged in specific positions
and instead of assembling a completemagneto,
they were told to only perform a singletask
and slide the magneto onto the next person.
Since each worker was just repeating the sametask,
it brought the total assembly time
down from20 minutes to just 13 minutes.
To speed up theprocess even more
Ford replaced the table witha
conveyor belt that moved at a constant speed.
This caused the slow workers to speed up
and thefastest workers to slow down,
balancing out theline and keeping everything in sync.
In just afew months,
Ford went from producing 800 Magnetosa day
to almost 3,000.
This way of working wasso successful
that Ford immediately began
tryingto use it for more complex parts.
The engine, forexample
took around 10 hours to produce and
hadto travel over 1,200 m around the factory
as itmoved from one machine to another.
Ford knew thatarranging
these machines in a more logical order
would massively speed things up.
But at the time
this was simply impossible.
Most factories weremechanically powered
meaning a large drive shaftat the center of the factory
provided turningpower to the machines
through a complex systemof pulleys.
Since each machine required a
specificamount of speed and power
they had to be placednear a pulley
that was geared to that specificspeed.
The result was that heavy machinery
ended up on one side of the factory
and morelightweight machines
ended up on the other side.
It was completely unoptimized
and workers wasted alot of time simply moving
parts around the factoryfrom machine to machine.
To get around this
Forddecided to make the entire factory electric
and set up an enormous power station at the factory
which produced 34 megawatts of electricity.
Withthis, Ford could get rid of the heavy,
dangerousdrive shafts
and simply run cables
to power each machine individually.
With no restrictionson
where the machinery could be placed
Fordrearranged the engine assembly line,
and the totaltravel distance
was reduced from 1,200 m to just90.
Throughout 1913
Ford went crazy
creating newassembly lines,
installing custom-made machines,
and simplifying jobs down to their most basictasks.
The radiator, which was
made up of 95 thinmetal tubes,
had to be fitted and hand soldered
by a skilled worker.
Ford built a machine thatarranged the metal tubes
and passed them througha
furnace to do the soldering automatically.
Parts that had to be machined on a lathe first
required the workers to screw the part intoplace
and unscrew it when it was finished.
Fordredesigned the lathe to have an automatic clamp,
which reduced the
duration of each task by morethan 90%
Thanks to all of this optimization,
the total amount of man-hour to produce
a single car went from 450 hours to just150 hours.
But there was at least one
downside to this new way of working.
The work had become so monotonous for the workers
that more and more people started to quit.
Newworkers were constantly having to be hired
andtrained into the role
which started to hurt the
overall efficiency of the factory.
Henry Fordsaw this and decided to do
something that wouldbe unimaginable today.
He announced that Fordwould raise
the daily salary for all workers from$2.34 to $5
and shorten the workday from 9 hoursto 8 hours.
More than 10,000 people
turned up thenext day to apply for a job.
And Ford never hadtrouble losing workers again.
This was headlinenews all over the country,
and it was hard to seeit
as anything other than a positive.
Nowadays,
it's easy to imagine how a story like this
can be sensationalized and manipulated by themedia.
That's why I'm happy that
Ground News issponsoring today's video.
Ground News is a news comparison app and website
that shows you how eachnews story
is being reported across the political spectrum.
It pulls together reports on the same
story from outlets around the world
while showing you useful context like political bias,
ownership,
and how trustworthy each source is,
so you canquickly understand
what's being emphasized,
what'sbeing left out,
and come to your own conclusions.
For example,
Texas just voted to keep the law thatrequires the Ten Commandments to be displayed inpublic classrooms.
The coverage details show that
left-leaning outlets reported on the story
far more than right-leaning outlets.
And if we lookat the headlines,
we can see that left-leaning
outlets used words like force
to emphasize thatthe Ten
Commandments rule is mandatory in schools.
Right-leaning outlets were much more positive
about the decision, framing it as a victory
for religious freedom.
But how do I know I cantrust any of the reports?
Well, all of the dataon Ground News
is analyzed by three completely
independent news monitoring organizations,
andthis shows the trustworthiness of each publisherreporting on the story.
Ground News also givesyou personalized data,
helping you keep track of
your own blind spots and biases,
so you can getcloser to the truth.
Subscribe to get 40% off theunlimited access
Vantage plan by scanning this QRcode
and by going to ground.news/primal.
The linkis in the description.
Again, it's ground.news/primalto see the full picture.
In orderto make the Model T available to the masses,
Ford had spent the entire year
rearrangingmachinery and
setting up assembly lines withone goal
make as many cars as possible.
All ofthe fixed costs, like the factory and machines,
stayed basically the same
no matter how many carsthey produced
and so the more cars they made,
the cheaper would be per car.
It may seemobvious now,
but at the time, none of this hadbeen figured out
and Ford was really pioneering
the idea of mass production.
By the end of 1913,
Ford had more than doubled its daily output
andthe price of a Model T
had dropped by almost$200.
But although Ford had optimized
the assemblyof thousands of parts,
the final cars were still being
assembled at stationary workbenches
andthis quickly became
the bottleneck for the entireproduction.
And so in 1914,
Ford set up the holygrail of factory efficiency,
the final assemblyline.
The idea was simple.
All of the sub-assembly
lines
would feed a constant supply of
finishedparts into the final assembly line
where theywould be mounted onto
the chassis as it moved through the factory.
The entire assembly processwas studied
and broken down into 45 individualsteps
assigned to 140 workers
and spread outacross the line.
Here's how it worked.
Basicchassis would leave a sub-assembly line
and enterthe start of the final assembly line where theywould get pulled along by a chain driven sled.
Asthe chassis moved down the line,
workers added thefront and rear axles
and soon after the gas tanks,
which were conveniently rolled
down a chute from asub-assembly line above.
Further down the line,
the engine would be dropped
into place from an overhead rail
that fed the workers with a constant
supply of finished engines.
The dashboard,
steering, exhaust, and pedals
would all cometogether in a quick sequence of tasks.
Finishedwheels from the sub-assembly line
would drop downholes in the floor,
and two workers would
attachall four wheels to the car.
The radiators werestored in a raised platform above
and would slide down a chute,
ready for the workers to install.
For work that had to be done underneath the car,
special creepers were made that
could clamp ontothe chassis as it moved.
This meant that workers could lie down
and work on the car with
both handsas they got pulled along.
After 44 steps, the cars
would be driven off the assembly line
under theirown power onto another
assembly line outside thefactory.
Just above the final assembly line was the body shop.
Here, all of the body parts were stamped
and assembled into a lightweight
piece andmoved outside to a platform.
The finished chassiswould move under this platform
and the body wouldbe lowered on top,
completing the entire assemblyin just 90 minutes.
By the end of 1914, Ford had
set up three identical assembly lines
to raise itsdaily output from 450
to well over 1,000 cars aday.
This increase in production allowed Ford
todrop the price of its touring model
to just $345by 1916.
But no matter how efficient the factory became,
there was still one huge bottleneck.
Although the overall labor costs per car were low,
most of the cost per car went into buyingmaterials
which were still being purchasedexternally.
Ford realized that if it could control
the production of every part,
right down topulling the material out of the ground,
it wouldsave enormously on costs
and guarantee a constantsupply of parts.
Ford purchased iron ore mines
inMichigan and Minnesota,
coal mines in Kentucky,
forests for wood, and its own railroad.
Ore fromthe mines was delivered
into the factory using itsown trains,
where it was transformed into steel
using furnaces powered by its own coal.
In justa handful of years,
Ford had taken completecontrol of
basically every material needed to make the Model T,
and it brought the totalmaterial
cost per car from $590 to just $190.
Ford had mastered the art of mass production.
Yearafter year, it kept producing more and more cars,
finally reaching a peak in 1923
when it producedmore than 2 million
and its price dropped to just $260.
By this point, almost everything
inside thefactory had been optimized.
But Henry Ford hadone last idea,
an idea that was so significant,
itstill benefits us to this day.
He recognized thatthe health of his workers
made a difference in the
overall quality and output of work.
Someone that was well-rested and refreshed
would come to workand do a better job.
At the time, normal factoryjobs
still required long 10 to 15 hour shifts
with only a single day off on Sundays.
To give his workers more rest time
and to ensure thatthey came to work more refreshed,
he introduced the 5-day work week.
Workers would now make $6 perday,
but only work 40 hours a week
and have 2 daysoff at the end.
He literally invented the weekend
and it worked.
Ford saw a noticeable increase inproductivity
and after this almost all industries
adopted this working schedule
and it's why westill have it today.
It's hard to overstate justhow impactful
Ford's ideas were on our society.
Today, almost every manufactured product
like TVs,phones, refrigerators, and washing machines
areonly available in large quantities and at lowprices
because of the incredible engineering
that happened inside this factory.
Thanks forwatching, and I'll see you in the next video.